## Chapter 4 Quick Quiz



1.A change in which of the following will NOT shift the demand curve for hamburgers?

a. the price of hot dogs

b. the price of hamburgers

c. the price of hamburger buns

d. the income of hamburger consumers

$~$

2.An increase in ________ will cause a movement along a given demand curve, which is called a change in________.

a. supply, demand

b. supply, quantity demanded

c. demand, supply

d. demand, quantity supplied

$~$

3.Movie tickets and film streaming services are substitutes. If the price of film streaming increases, what happens in the market for movie tickets?

a. The supply curve shifts to the left.

b. The supply curve shifts to the right.

c. The demand curve shifts to the left.

d. The demand curve shifts to the right.

$~$

4.The discovery of a large new reserve of crude oil will shift the ________ curve for gasoline, leading to a ________ equilibrium price.

a. supply, higher

b. supply, lower

c. demand, higher

d. demand, lower

$~$

5.If the economy goes into a recession and incomes fall, what happens in the markets for inferior goods?

a. Prices and quantities both rise.

b. Prices and quantities both fall.

c. Prices rise and quantities fall.

d. Prices fall and quantities rise.

$~$

6.Which of the following might lead to an increase in the equilibrium price of jelly and a decrease in the equilibrium quantity of jelly sold?

a. an increase in the price of peanut better, a complement to jelly

b. an increase in the price of Marshmallow Fluff, a substitute for jelly

c. an increase in the price of grapes, an input into jelly

d. an increase in consumers’ incomes, as long as jelly is a normal good

$~$

7.Ketchup is a complement (as well as a condiment) for hot dogs. If the price of hot dogs rises, what happens in the market for ketchup? For tomatoes? For tomato juice? For orange juice?

$~$

8.The market for pizza has the following demand and supply schedules:

| Price | Quantity Demanded | Quantity Supplied |
| ----- | ----------------- | ----------------- |
| $ 4   | 135 pizzas        | 26 pizzas         |
| 5     | 104               | 53                |
| 6     | 81                | 81                |
| 7     | 68                | 98                |
| 8     | 53                | 110               |
| 9     | 39                | 121               |

a. Graph the demand and supply curves. What are the equilibrium price and quantity in this market?
b. If the actual price in this market were above the equilibrium price, what would drive the market toward the equilibrium?
c. If the actual price in this market were below the equilibrium price, what would drive the market toward the equilibrium?

$~$

9.Consider the following events: Scientists reveal that eating oranges decreases the risk of diabetes, and at the same time, farmers use a new fertilizer that makes orange trees produce more oranges. Illustrate and explain what effect these changes have on the equilibrium price and quantity of oranges.

$~$

10.Because bagels and cream cheese are often eaten together, they are complements.

a. We observe that both the equilibrium price of cream cheese and the equilibrium quantity of bagels have risen. What could be responsible for this pattern-a fall in the price of flour or a fall in the price of milk? Illustrate and explain your answer.

b. Suppose instead that the equilibrium price of cream cheese has risen but the equilibrium quantity of bagels has fallen. What could be responsible for this pattern-a rise in the price of flour or a rise in the price of milk? Illustrate and explain your answer.

$~$

11.Suppose that the price of basketball tickets at your college is determined by market forces. Currently, the demand and supply schedules are as follows:

| Price | Quantity Demanded | Quantity Supplied |
| ----- | ----------------- | ----------------- |
| $ 4   | 10,000 tickets    | 8,000 tickets     |
| 8     | 8,000             | 8,000             |
| 12    | 6,000             | 8,000             |
| 16    | 4,000             | 8,000             |
| 20    | 2,000             | 8,000             |

a. Draw the demand and supply curves. What is unusual about this supply curve? Why might this be true?

b. What are the equilibrium price and quantity of tickets?

c. Your college plans to increase total enrollment next year by 5,000 students. The additional students will have the following demand schedule:

| Price | Quantity Demanded |
| ----- | ----------------- |
| $ 4   | 4,000 tickets     |
| 8     | 3,000             |
| 12    | 2,000             |
| 16    | 1,000             |
| 20    | 0                 |

Now add the old demand schedule and the demand schedule for the new students to calculate the new demand schedule for the entire college. What will be the new equilibrium price and quantity?